p. 75   The annoyance of the Lords of Xibalba
And having gone to play ball on the road to Xibalba, they were overheard by Hun-Came and Vucub-Came, the lords of Xibalba.
\"What are they doing on earth? Who are they who are making the earth shake, and making so much noise? Go and call them! Let them come here to play ball. Here we will overpower them!
We are no longer respected by them. They no longer have consideration, or fear of our rank, and they even fight above our heads,\" said all the lords of Xibalba.

p.82   The ball game challenge
The four messengers had the rank of Ahpop-Achih. Leaving Xibalba, they arrived quickly, bringing their message to the court where Hun-Hunahpii and Vucub-Hunahpu were playing ball, at the ball-court which was called Nim-Xob-Carchah. 3 The owl messengers went directly to the ball-court and delivered their message exactly as it was given to them by Hun-Came, Vucub- Came, Ahalpuh, Ahalgana, Chamiabac, Chamiaholom, Xiquiripat, Cuchumaquic, Ahalmez, Ahaltocob, Xic, and Patan, as the lords were called who sent the message by the owls.
\"Did the Lords Hun-Came and Vucub-Came really say that we must go with you?\"
\"They certainly said so, and 'Let them bring all their playing gear,' the lords said.\"
\"Very well,\" said the youths. \"Wait for us, we are only going to say good-bye to our mother.\"
And having gone straight home, they said to their mother, for their father was dead: \"We are going, our mother, but our going is only for a while, a The messengers of the lord have come to take us. 'They must come,' they said, according to the messengers.
\"We shall leave our ball here in pledge,\" 5 they added. They went immediately to hang it in the space under the rooftree. \"We will return to play,\" they said.
And going to Hunbatz and Hunchouen they said to them: \"Keep on playing the flute and singing, painting, and carving; warm our house and warm the heart of your grandmother.\"








P.83   The acceptance of the game and the trip to Xibalba

When they took leave of their mother, Xmucane was moved and burst into tears. \"Do not worry, we are going, but we have not died yet,\" said Hun-Hunahpii and Vucub-Hunahpu as they left.
Hun-Hunahpii and Vucub-Hunahpu went immediately and the messengers took them on the road.
Thus they were descending the road to Xibalba, by some very steep stairs. They went down until they came to the bank of a river which flowed rapidly between the ravines called Nuzivdn cul and Cuzivdn  and crossed it. Then they crossed the river which flows among thorny calabash trees.
There were very many calabash trees, but they passed through them without hurting themselves.



P.86   The defeat of  Hun-Hunahpu

\"Well. Today shall be the end of your days. Now you shall die. You shall be destroyed, we will break you into pieces and here your faces will stay hidden. You shall be sacrificed,\" said Hun- Came and Vucub-Came.
They sacrificed them immediately and buried them in the Pucbal-Chah, as it was called. 15 Before burying them, ig they cut off the head of Hun-Hunahpii and buried the older brother together with the younger brother.
\"Take the head and put it in that tree which is Planted on the road,\" said Hun-Came and Vucub- Came. And having put the head in the tree, instantly the tree, which had never borne fruit before the head of Hun-Hunahpii was placed among its branches, was covered with fruit. And this calabash tree, it is said, is the one which we now call the head of Hun-Hunahpu.
Hun-Came and Vucub-Came looked in amazement at the fruit on the tree. The round fruit was everywhere; but they did not recognize the head of Hun-Hunahpu; it was exactly like the other fruit of the calabash tree. So it seemed to all of the people of Xibalba when they came to look at it. According to their judgment, the tree was miraculous, because of what had instantly occurred when they put Hun-Hunahpu' s head among its branches. And the Lords of Xibalba said: \"Let no one come to pick this fruit, n Let no one come and sit under this tree!\" they said, and so the Lords of Xibalba resolved to keep everybody away. The head of Hun-Hunahpii did not appear again is because it had become one and the same as the fruit of the gourd tree. Nevertheless, a girl heard the wonderful story. Now we shall tell about her arrival.








P. 90 The Birth of  Hunahpii and Xbalanque
His is the story of a maiden, the daughter of a lord named Cuchumaquic.
A maiden, then, daughter of a lord heard this story. The name of the father was Cuchumaquic and that of the maiden was Xquic. 1 When she heard the story of the fruit of the tree which her father told, she was amazed to hear it.
\"Why can I not go to see this tree which they tell about?\" the girl exclaimed. \"Surely the fruit of which I hear tell must be very good.\" Finally she went alone and arrived at the foot of the tree which was planted in Pucbal-Chah.
\"Ah!\" she exclaimed. \"What fruit is this which this tree bears? Is it not wonderful to see how it is covered with fruit? Must I die, shall I be lost, if I pick one of this fruit?\" said the maiden.
Then the skull which was among the branches of the tree spoke up and said: \"What is it you wish?
Those round objects which cover the branches of the trees are nothing but skulls.\" So spoke the head of Hun-Hunahpu turning to the maiden. \"Do you, perchance, want them?\" it added.
\"Yes, I want them,\" the maiden answered.
\"Very well,\" said the skull. \"Stretch your right hand up here.\"
\"Very well,\" said the maiden, and with her right hand reached toward the skull.

In that instant the skull let a few drops of spittle fall directly into the maiden's palm. She looked quickly and intently at the palm of her hand, but the spittle of the skull was not there.
\"In my saliva and spittle I have given you my descendants,\" said the voice in the tree. \"Now my head has nothing on it any more, it is nothing but a skull without flesh. So are the heads of the great princes, the flesh is all which gives them a handsome appearance. And when they die, men are frightened by their bones. So, too, is the nature of the sons, which are like saliva and spittle, they may be sons of a lord, of a wise man, or of an orator. 2 They do not lose their substance when they go, but they bequeath it; the image of the lord, of the wise man, or of the orator does not disappear, nor is it lost, but he leaves it to the daughters and to the sons which he begets. I have done the same with you. Go up, then, to the surface of the earth, that you may not die. Believe in my words that it will be so,\" said the head of Hun-Hunahpu and of Vucub-Hunahpu.
And all that they did together was by order of Huracan, Chipi-Caculha, and Raxa-Caculha. After all of the above talking, the maiden returned directly to her home, having immediately conceived the sons in her belly by virtue of the spittle only. And thus Hunahpii and Xbalanque were begotten.
